Hi, this is Scott. I
really appreciate our sponsors because
they make the show possible.
Today's show is sponsored by
Tellerik create compelling app experiences
across any screen with the
Tellerik platform Telerx end to
end platform. Uniquely combines industry
leading UI tools with cloud
services to simplify the entire
app development cycle Tellerik offers
everything.net developers need to build
quality apps faster. Try it
free at tellerik.com/platform that's tellerik.com/platform
From Hansel minutes.com it's Hansel
minutes or weekly discussion with
web developer and technologist Scott
Hanselman. This is Lawrence Ryan announcing
show number four 59. In
this episode, Scott talks with
dark language founders Laura's back
in Casper lawn. Hi, this
is Scott Hanselman. This is
another episode of Hansel minutes
and on Skype, I've got
large back and Casper Lund,
Lars and Casper are in
our hosts in Denmark and
they work on amongst other
things. The dart language to
Lars is known for working
on V eight and Casper
has a long history of
working on virtual machines. Thanks
gentlemen, for joining me today,
It's our pleasure. So the
dart language is something that
I've been exploring and it's
been going on now for
what about four years since
you announced it at the
GoTo conference? That is correct.
It's been a long time,
but introducing new language takes
a while before it gets
adopted. So it's a, it's
always a long term project.
When you introduce some language,
When you were on stage
and you were presenting it
for the first time, are
you presenting a concept? Are
you presenting a prototype? How
baked is it? How, how
secretive are you before you
make it completely open? We
made it a completely open
from the beginning. So this
has been all along a
completely open source project. And
you can follow minute to
minute how we do development
in our repository. It's all
open and the main purpose
of the doc program and
the tools around it is
just to make programmers more
productive. So we want to
make sure that programmers can
write big programs and then
they can do it in
an efficient way. So they
don't spend time on debugging
problems and stuff like that.
So that is a fairly
simplistic programming language. That's easy
to understand, and we believe
it scales fairly well to
big applications. Is that the
primary idea that, that, that
is to replace JavaScript though,
that JavaScript is not serving
us in large applications. Therefore,
a simpler programming language is
required. We do see a
lot of people that build
big things in JavaScript are
struggling and a lot of
different tools come out to
try to help that. And
I think dart fits nicely
into that niche as well.
But at the same time,
we are building a general
purpose programming language that fits
in a lot of places.
So I wouldn't call it
a JavaScript replacement, but as
an alternative for certain kinds
of, of work. So I
think it's really important to
us to also talk about
the importance of having options
when you are a programmer
or developer, right? You need
to use the tools that
are best for your needs
and is clear if you
I'm writing smaller programs for
the web. Do you have
a script for this next
program, millennials? And I believe
it's even fast nowadays, but
the, but the important part
is that we could also
see that big companies like
Google and other ones too,
when writing the case and
they were struggling with the
complexity and the lack of
structure in, in JavaScript. And
that was sort of the
opening that made us think
about creating something that will
suit better big projects. So
if you have the several
teams collaborating on a big
piece of software, we actually
had a programming language here
that would help facilitate that
development work. You could say
that other other things have
come along since we introduced
that like TypeScript and a
few others like that, that
sort of gives us the
impression that we're not alone.
And having the understanding that
building really big things in
pure JavaScript is hard work.
So getting more structure and
more tooling around it is
very helpful. So when something
comes out like, like TypeScript,
do you look upon that
as a validation of your
concepts or as competition? Where,
how do you as programming
language creators, see things like
that? I think the answer
is both. Of course there's
a competitor and we love
competition. So it's really nice
to have competitors. So we
are on our toes and
making a better platform. On
the other hand, it's also
validates that the program has
need choice when doing applications.
So I will com platforms
as well. And I think
the platforms are learning from
each other. So I think
we are seeing faster improvements
to client side programming tools
than we did in the
past. And that's a very
good thing for all developers.
So I think we can
really keep that up for
awhile. We can actually improve
the state of the yard
within client side programming tremendously.
So you say client side
programming, but I'm also hearing
that you're looking at dart
as being more general purpose.
Do you think you'll be
writing, you know, when you
write note apps in dart
and write service side apps
in dart, In fact, you
can already do that today.
So if you go to
our repository, you can see
there's already the server packages
available. So if you want
to provide, so as in
dark, you can do that.
And we are using that
quite heavily ourselves. So like
we are, we're using auto
own tools of course, to
have to learn something about
them, but we're building a
lot of the dark tooling
in art itself. And most
of those tools actually run
on the command line in
a more service side, like
setting then not really like
client apps. So the translator
we have to translate starts
to efficient. JavaScript is essentially
a problem. You run it
on your workstation. So it's
not a client side programming
any in any form. Hmm.
So anywhere, anywhere a JavaScript
that VM runs anywhere, V8
runs dark runs as well.
Can you tell me, you
talk about the relationship between
JavaScript and V8 and dart
and does dart have its
own VM or to start
run on VA because you
talk about translating dart to
JavaScript. And when I think
JavaScript, I think V8, I'm
not quite sure about those
relationships. So, so again, well
the answer is yes, and
yes, first of all, it's
important to, to note that
we don't want to break
the web. So it's important
that we can warn in
our process and in order
to do that, we need
to generate a demo script
so that when you have
a DOD program, you want
to run in, in a,
in a, in a browser,
we can translate to JavaScript
and it will behave exactly
the same if you run
it in Safari or Firefox,
as well as in, in
Chrome on the server side,
if you want to stand
alone dot on the server,
you you're typically using the,
the dot VM and we
have a fairly good, so
a VM. So you can
run in 64 bit mode
and run with like 16
gigabytes of heaps. If that's
what you want. And you
can process big data. Is
the dart VM a, an
offshoot of, I'm not sure
if offshoot or fork is
better than a VA, or
is it its own, you
know, clean room implementation of
a new VM for made
for dart only, Oh, this
is of course a clean
room implementation. So DOD is
fundamentally different than . When
we created the other script.
It was a use an
exercise in making a very
dynamic system run fast. And
the way we did that
was by, by cooking up,
eh, eh, classes on the
fly, if you will, to
make it run fast. So
we were creating thousands and
thousands of classes behind the
scenes while running Java script.
We don't have to do
that in that because it's
more structured. So all this
dynamic behavior we don't, we
couldn't use for anything. And
that also allows us to
make a simpler working machine
that will execute that. And
we can certainly take advantage
of that to make it
run faster and skate better.
Oh, okay. So the dart
virtual machine, because it is
really truly the dart virtual
machine for dart, it is
fundamentally different in the problems
that it's trying to solve
from JavaScript. It's I would
maybe say that in order
to support JavaScript, they're probably
some hacks that you needed
to do to make VA
super fast, but on the
dark side, you design the
language. So you know what
your goal is, and you
can run faster. Exactly. Example
of that is that in
JavaScript and all objects that
you have are basically expandable
by design. So you can
add new properties through them
on the fly, which is
a very dynamic feature. And
that is the way you
construct objects in JavaScript in
art. You declare that you're
a certain class of objects,
we'll have a number of
fields. And once you create
an instance of a certain
class, you cannot add new
fields to it. So there's
the structure and the less
flexible, but much more structured
approach really helps the VM
run, run the code faster
because it doesn't have to
care about or worry about
people adding properties to objects
on the fly. And another
way to look at it
is when we did V8,
we were focusing on optimizing
a subset of JavaScript that
one fast. And if you
went outside that subset, the
performance would degrade. One example.
If you delete a property
or an object in a,
in a critical path of
your program, it will just
slow down tremendously in the
NGO script. And that's just
the hard to fix because
jails could be so, so
flexible in that. On the
other hand, you cannot change
the, the format of an
object after it's been created.
And that means that there's
no subset as fast, the
whole language is fast. So
that's another way of putting
it. So we are trying
to make sure that all
programs are written that are
performing really well compared to
in JavaScript, but you have
to, to manage within a
subset of it. Oh, okay.
One of the things that
I tell, you know, new
programmers when I'm teaching them
is assert your assumptions. And
it seems to me like
by asserting those assumptions at
the programming language level, you're
making it a lot easier.
The runtime, because you're not
going to pull something out
from underneath them. Like you
just said, like, if you,
you know, this is an
object, this is an object.
No, it's not the object.
You thought it was everything,
you know is wrong. Now,
runtime, try again. You really
can't be both incredibly flexible
and incredibly fast. Can you,
Unless you are very structured
in your approach and it
turns out most proficient error
script programmers, they use this
subset and will gain a
fairly good performance out of
it, but it's still a
very dynamic, there's no static
types. Whereas in doc, we
put in often aesthetic type.
So if you want to
make sure that you can,
that the contract between a
user and the library is
maintained, you can validate that
library is only used in
a certain way. That's really
hard to do in JavaScript
because there's no static types
Static typing in dart then
is it really just a,
a spellcheck it's a, a
more aggressive compile or other
runtime things that are gonna
maybe make it slower because
I use those annotations. So
the there's two things in
the programming environment, in the
programming Weinman, you can type,
take your programs. I can
tell you if something doesn't
match, but since it's mixed
mode or optional type, some
code is on type. Then
some is typed it's up
to the program of sight,
what he wants to use,
but we haven't moved. If
we can. One the in
that will validate that you
pay the types in the
program, but when you deploy
the program, you of course
don't want to run in
this validation mode and then
once full speed. So there's
a few ways that you
can validate your program behaves
the way you expect it
to do. We've. We found
that basically using type annotations,
at least allowing people to
use them as assertions in
their code so they can
check them at runtime and
the system will do that
for them. It makes it
a lot easier to track
down weird issues when debugging,
so that if you turn
this thing on, you might
get the failure a lot
earlier than you expected, but
that will tell you much
more about where this weird
value turned up in the
system, and it will not
propagate as far through the
system before you can really
get there, get to the
cause of it. So it's
really, really helpful when testing
and validating that yourself at
works. I have an interesting
story. We had a company
that had a group of
designers. They prefer writing in,
on type code. And then
they had the infrastructure guys
that communicated with the backend.
They wanted to have everything
typed and in dart, they
work really well because when
they put these two pieces
of code together, they could,
the infrastructure guys could validate
that the sinus would pass
in the right kind of
optics when the tests, the
code. So in such an
example, they have the freedom
that they want it. And
at the same time, it
could validate the program work
the way it was intended
to. Interesting that that actually
makes a lot of sense.
One of the other things
that I think is interesting
about dart is that you,
you, it feels, you know,
it feels see, like, of
course it's, class-based, it's single
inheritance, but then you've got
these mix ends. Maybe you
could talk about that because
it seems like mix ins
are, are really gaining acceptance,
but the idea that you've
taken something that's very much
like C and very much
like Java and then something
that's very much like Ruby
and brought them together is
really interesting. So it makes
sense. It's a fairly simple
concept. Sometimes you want to
share code between separate class
hierarchies and it's, it's, it's
somewhat hard to do in
most systems. Some systems allow
you to do like multiple
inheritance, but it gets really
complicated very quickly. So you
can think of a mix
and as all the methods
and all the behavior from
a certain class, and you,
you can actually, in doc,
you can say that I
want my class to basically
get the same behavior as
another class pulled into it
definition. So you can basically
have small units of behavior
that you can plug into
different class hierarchies and get
extra sharing through that. So
imagine that you have, and
you want to have multiple
different kinds of lists in
your system, but they all
share a good chunk of
the same behavior, like finding
an element by index or
something like that. You can
take that behavior and put
it in one place in
a mixer, and then you
can apply that mix into
multiple independent Vista implementations and
get my sharing out of
that. So many ways, it's
a simple concept. So the
alternative, if you don't have
mixing is you copy the
code from one place to
another. So you have several
copies around and then it
becomes really hard to maintain.
So mixing, what we'll help
you do is to keep
the code concise and make
sure we don't replicate the
behavior. One of the examples
that I always try to
try to use for myself
to understand this is that
we build the standard object
oriented animal hierarchy that we
always learned in school. And
then suddenly these animals know
how to save themselves and
save themselves, persist themselves to
disk. And then this is
where the students' eyes start
to glaze over because it's
like, well, they don't really
do that. But then with
a mix and you could
have something like persistence that
has nothing to do with
it. So it's almost like
there's a, a multiple inheritance,
but it's not the kind
of inheritance that matters. Like
the main primary inheritance is
your single inheritance and then
mix ins are, are kind
of orthogonal to that. Yep.
That's exactly right. And then,
so rather than interfaces, and
then having things that know
how to save them, the
objects could really have that
functionality by themselves. Is it
primarily to stay dry? Is
it just a pragmatic thing
to have makes sense? I
always say it. It's just
a very good abstraction mechanism.
You can use. One thing
I would like to point
out in DOD is that
X class in dark can
be used both as an
interface as a class. And
if the mix it, so
the class concept we'll call
all three uses. And that's
a little bit different than
if you look at Java
where you have explicit classes
and explicit interfaces, That's different
than a lot of languages,
isn't it? That's, it's almost
like it's, you're speaking about
contracts more generally. And, and,
and, you know, if it,
if it kind of duct
typing, you know, like if
we need to use this
in the context of an
interface, then we just will.
Yeah. We found that sometimes
it's really hard for people
to be forced to split
a class into an interface
and interpretation very early on
the process. So sometimes they
will not do it because
it feels painful later on.
Maybe someone comes along and
can provide a different implementation
of the same kind of
class. And it's really painful
that then you have to
go and change the original
code to allow you to
do that. It's much, much
nicer than you can just
say, I'll hook into this
and I'll make it work.
And I'll just, instead of
inheriting from that class, I'll
just internet, the same interface
as it has. And it
works really well in practice.
I would say When you're
creating a language like this,
you know, within the context
of Google, you're, you're kind
of, they're your benefactors, But
you're not like Research. Like
sometimes computer languages get created
by researchers in a very
philosophical way up in a
ivory tower somewhere. But everything
I hear about you guys
is pragmatism, pragmatism, pragmatism. How
does that work? That organizationally?
So organizationally it's, it's very
simple, right? We, our main
goal is to make, make
products that work and that
will make programs more productive
when they write programs. It
is not research. And I
think it's important that we
don't see ourselves as researchers
because then it sort of
easily ends up being more
advanced than you actually want
for phenomenal programs. So we
actually took a very pragmatic
view when you signed the
language that we wanted, something
that was simple to understand
actually our, our, our model
was a little bit like
small, small talk. That's a
very, has a very simple
execution model. We wanted that
to, we didn't want a
sort of implicit conversion of
objects on the fly as
you haven't, you have a
script. So very simple. So
when you looked at the
program, you knew exactly what
would happen when you execute
it. So that was sort
of the starting point of
it. And of course, curly
braces, you needed that because
otherwise you cannot become popular.
But the, but I think
the, the design of the
language while doing the instrumentation
and making sure it was
fast initially, I think has
really helped us understand what
we need to do in
order to evolve the language.
Your goal, as you stated,
is really just, you know,
make a great language that
people will like to use.
But out in the, out,
in the, in the, in
the world, it's kind of
like the language Wars. And
it seems like there's almost
a, a renewed Renaissance in
language, as people are getting
excited again about languages. We,
there was a very quiet
period. I felt in the
early two thousands where it
was like time to write
some Java and everyone was
just out there writing their,
their boring stuff. And then
suddenly we've got Brust and
we've got go, and we've
got Python and we've got
Ruby and we're going go,
going, going, going talk a
little bit about, about go,
because this is another language
is that's that's coming up.
Are they, are they comp
competing? Are they coopertition? How
does that work? The rise
of go and the rise
of dark. I think it's
a different programming language. So
there's a little bit of
competition now. They're also from
Google and they're good friends
of ours. So it's not
a big deal. The, the
main point I want to
make is that that goal
is mostly targeting suicide computation,
where we are trying to
be more general purpose, and
we will also want inside
the browser. And again, we
have really tried with designing
that to make it easy
to start using. So our
goal from the beginning was
to make sure that if
you had a background in
Java script or Java or
C sharp, you will within
an hour to be up
running with dot, and that's
something we have kept in
mind doing the whole design.
And I think it's pretty
close to what we in
debt. Yeah, we were pretty
cautious in the sense that
we felt like we couldn't
improve something dramatically. We decided
to go for the Familia
solution. And I think that
that's paid off and we
do get the feedback that
if people try this out
and they feel, feel it's
very easy to get going
in it, I think go
is, requires a little bit
more of, of, of change
of mind and coming to
terms with a different kind
of program model, which to
some makes it a lot
more exciting. And I think
that's a very good thing,
but for us, I think,
eh, trying to basically cater
to some, to the needs
of, of people that just
want to write their app
and get it out there
running very efficiently, it seems
like the right approach. Yeah.
That makes sense. That makes
sense. One of the things
that I've said to people,
I think that they should,
if people say, what should
you learn if you want
to be a successful programmer
in 2014 or in 2015?
And I say, learn JavaScript
or a, and a systems
language. So something on the
front end, something on the
backend, so they could learn
dart maybe and Java or
dart and, and no JS
on the back end or
dart and go, so go
would be more for server
side and concurrency type things.
And then they could learn
dart or they could, in
this case, you're saying they
can use dart as JavaScript
and as serve as a
system. No. Then you can
ask the question, why is
it important that you run
the same language, both on
the client, on the server,
right. And the Holy grail
of course, is programmer productivity.
So we've can reuse the
same modules in the client
and on the server, you
save a lot of time
and it also makes it
easier to late in the
game to change the boundary
between the client and the
server, because it's all written
in the same language. So,
so certainly we see an
opportunity as well in making
sure that our platform works
well, both on the sewer
and on the client. But
again, if you want to
prefer Gera or I'll go
on the suicide and, and
data on the client side,
more power to you, I
think it's really important that
people actually feel like it's
a good thing to know
more than one language. I
think it makes you a
much better programmer in that
one Pacific specific language, if
you actually is fairly proficient
in other languages too, I
think you really need to
expand your license a little
bit. So even if I
prefer people to write everything
in that, I think probably
book would be better for
them to actually try a
few things and get to
terms with whatever works well
in go or Python or
rust, and then get back
to that afterwards. Yeah. I
think you have to find,
I always say the language
of your soul, you know,
the one that makes you
feel good, the one that
feels right in your hands,
the one that feels right
in your mouth, I have
to give you a compliment
though. I really feel like
when you go to lang.org
where people can learn about
dart, they can download the
editor. I really liked the
way you said you can
see dart in about five
minutes. You can write it
in about an hour and
you can dive deep in
about a day. It's, it's
really nonthreatening. You know, when,
when I think about some
of the other languages, like
if I were going to
go learn, you know, our
rushed or go, it's like,
Oh, I don't know if
I have the mental bandwidth
to just sit down and
dedicate my week to learning
food Lang. But you know,
like you say, with dart
and the way you've set
up the, the online stuff
and getting started, it really
is very nonthreatening. And particularly
around the type annotations it's
like, Oh, I, I kinda
know this already. Don't I,
And I think the it's
important to note here because
it's simple and unthreatening does
mean it's not expressive. And
I still believe that we
have a modern programming language
that within a few days,
we'll make it really efficient
in writing what you want.
And so we've been implementing
languages the last while, at
least for me the last
28 years or so, we
have tried very hard to
learn from the past and
make it simpler. It's definitely
not starting from, from scratch.
You could say, we're certainly
trying to, to make sure
that we sell to stand
on the shoulders of the
giants and that we build
on top of what others
found were effective ways of
doing things. So we, we've
definitely borrowed lots of concepts
from different places. And I
think that's a good way
of designing languages. I would
say it's the only, the
only way isn't it. I
mean, to abstract on the
shoulders of giants is the
whole is the whole point.
You know, this is languages
like these new languages, just
because the language is new,
it doesn't make it a
toy. And this is why
we, we look at the,
you know, the historical context
and where this language fits
into the family tree of
languages. And, you know, the
fact that this is not
the, this is not your
first rodeo. As we say
in America, you've made quite
a few virtual machines in
your, in your, in your
lifetimes. This is one question
I was, I was exploring
and doing some research. I
did see this, this leaked
internal mail before when dart
was called dash. And in
that mail, it's kind of
a strategy, mail and leaks
are always unfortunate. But one
of the things that is
interesting in there as they
talk about this idea of,
of the replacement for JavaScript,
will we ever replace it?
Or is it just one
of those things that it'll
always be with us is
JavaScript than idea virus. We
can't stop. Cause everyone talks
about, you know, we love
JavaScript. It's everywhere. We hate
JavaScript. It's so broken. Why
do we let it to
continue? What do you think
about that? So what can
I say? I think people
are still using cobalt. So
I, so the web, the
web browser is enormously popular,
right? A great advance has
done to even improve the
ECMAScript, which telescript, and also
the speed of it. So
it will be there for
a long, long time. And
I didn't write the memo
you're referring to. No, I
apologize. I didn't make that
clear. That was, that was
written by some strategy person.
Okay. So in my mind,
what I'm interested in is
making sure that programs have
the tools they need to
do to be efficient. And
especially when it comes to
structure and large programs, we
think that that provides a
good solution. And in fact,
we have had the projects
both inside and outside Google,
that we've got this feedback
that, that fairly big team
started working on that. And
when they ship there, they
come back to us and
say, you know what? This
has been a very pleasant
surprise in efficiency when it
came to, to build this
project. And that's basically, that's
why we're doing it. Like
product productivity of developers is
something that most people, I
think underwrite a little bit.
And I think your tools
really, really matter there. And
you could say that we're
much more interested in, in
helping people get a choice
of developer tools than we
are in replacing anything. I
think if anything, eh, time
has shown that there is
plenty of room for lots
of languages and tool chains,
and they will evolve over
time as well. So I
think the one way to
evaluate a good language from
my perspective is if you
have a debugger and when
you set a break point
and it stops them, or
there's a problem you can
go into debug, you can
understand what's happening in many
program. It's really hard to
figure out what's going on
and you have to put
in print statements just to
make progress. I think that
you should have different fields
that you, when you stop
inside the Depot, you know
exactly how we got there.
That's no magic. And I
think if you're comfortable with
everything that's related to the
programming language, eh, eh, you
you'll get better experimentation and,
and also becoming a better
programmer. That's a really great
explanation. I appreciate that. Cause
I think sometimes people who
are like my listeners and
myself as a, as a
working programmer in the world,
is it, it's hard to
separate the, the, the politics
of the companies and the
languages. And that's why it's
nice to go to the
creators and really get a
sense of, Hey, we're just
trying to build something great.
And I think you should
try it. And if it's
great, you should use it
and, and separate those. So
this we're sitting here in
Denmark fairly far out and,
and we only have one
objective that is to, to
make, make programs more efficient.
And so, yeah, that's no
politics here. You might hear
that from strategists, but not
from us. Very cool. Very
cool. And then one last
question I wanted to ask
was that this isn't just
something that you are just
making up in Denmark, you
have a specification, and this
is something that you send
to, can you talk a
little bit about the organization
of how dart evolves as
a language? Cause I know
that like async and deferred
loading and things like that
are happening. Yes. In fact,
that two days ago, the
ECMAScript technical committee TC 52
approved, I think, await and
also enums and this part
of the spec now. So
we have a, having a
standardization for the program blames.
And if you think it's
important, if you're, if you're
serious about making it a
good and sustainable program Alliance,
that we can get feedback
from other groups using it
so they can help making
it a better program language.
And also we don't want
to sort of just change
it based on the feel
of the day. So this
is a way of making
sure that new language proposals
are going through a process
and being evaluated before it
gets into the standard. Very
cool. Well, thank you gentlemen
so much for taking time
with me today to get
me up to speed and
my listeners up to speed
on dark. You're very welcome.
It was fun. Well, I
hope you will start using
it. Oh well, I'm actually,
you know, I'm taking a
look at the dart editor
right now. You can go
up to the dart lang.org.
You can download dart and
the editor works on windows
works everywhere. Thanks so much,
gentlemen. Welcome. Thank you. This
has been another episode of
Hanselminutes and we'll see you
again next week.